an immediate sequel to my earlier video
of just a few minutes ago talking
ultimately about self-discipline the
enjoyment of life and what it means to
lead a meaningful life and then I guess
separately but silently the way in which
intelligence infests every aspect of
your life and makes many simple
pleasures untenable for those of us who
choose to be intellectuals for those of
us who choose to live intelligently so
one of the guys who asked one of these
questions inspiring my earlier video
wrote back right away and in his reply
this is about in the middle of his reply
he says imagine dividing your time into
three buckets one things that fulfill
your vision of who you are two mundane
practical realities like washing dishes
and then three leisure activities and
then he goes on to argue that some
things belong into each category okay no
no my dude I don't admit of three
separate categories I don't even admit
of the distinction between work and
leisure I don't even think there's an
ethical or meaningful distinction here
between things you do for money and
things you do when nobody's paying you
to do them okay there's only one
category we're talking about here okay
and the category is you the product is
you the decisions you're making are
about what kind of person you want to be
everything else is just excuse making
and some of the excuse making is deeply
deeply culturally inculcated into us you
know including that a lot of people
ethically think oh well these are things
that only did on the job so they don't
come that's not who I really am like I
go to work eight hours a day but that's
not who I really am this over here this
one
do mister that's who I really am they're
guys who you know divide their own mind
like oh when I'm cheating on my wife
that's not who I really am when I'm at
home with my family that's my true self
or something no there is only one you
there is only one outcome we're
measuring here alright so what I'm
explaining in this series of videos it's
not difficult to understand it's
difficult to accept because you're
challenging both values you've received
from your parents grandparents
great-grandparents going back 2,000
years and also values that may be part
of your enjoyment and experience of life
on a day to day basis right here and
right now
so same guy writing me on discord raised
the example of chess playing chess and
again skiing he says well you're very
comfortable condemning cocaine and
you're very comfortable condemning video
games but it seems to me you're not
really comfortable condemning chess and
skiing guess again guess again
oh boy I live in Canada I'm Canadian
most most Canadians think I'm insane
because of my condemnation of skiing
they can't relate to it at all they
think of skiing as the apogee of refined
bourgeois self-indulgence all right and
I condemn it in precisely the same terms
as cocaine there's an overlap between
these two things - skiing is very much
linked to a whole lot of drug habits in
Canada nope
my condemnation of skiing is absolute
okay playing chess great example great
Civ why do you think playing chess is
mentally morally ethically in any way
better than playing a video game
how is playing chess better than playing
Virtua Fighter on the Sega Saturn how is
playing chess better than playing any of
the military strategy games there was
one called military madness when I was a
kid that are very often
based on chess you're moving pieces
around a board and you know there are
tanks and airplanes instead of rooks and
knights right why why do you imagine
it's more intellectual or more mentally
productive to play chess than history
and look in a recent video I took on one
of the greatest cultural sacred cows of
all and I said hey why do you think it's
better to sit alone in your bedroom and
practice repetitive finger motions
playing a keyboard or playing a violin
as opposed to playing a video game okay
it's all it's all the
accumulation of excuses
all right in some cases there are
excuses you made up yourself in some
cases they're excuses you accept it from
your parents in some cases there are
excuses that accumulated over lifetimes
and lifetimes going back centuries or
going back a thousand years handed down
within families okay there are some
really serious ways in which video games
are worse than cocaine I'm gonna tell
you one of them right now all right
my parents bought me video games they
gave me video games the child they sat
me down and said oh good you play video
games well we go and do this other thing
whatever it was they wanted to do right
my parents encouraged me to play video
games all right my parents didn't
encourage me to use cocaine right I'm
hope I hope this is true for many of you
in the audience also right these these
habits and probably this you're
telling me right now it's probably
because your parents or other people in
your culture may be school teachers they
told you that playing chess is something
tremendously refined and sophisticated
that intelligent people do the playing
chess is something that will make you
smarter right make you a better person
maybe they told you that about skiing
also okay it's all all right
all of it and if you're being honest
with yourself you'd question how is it
even possible for someone who's leading
a meaningful life to enjoy waste
time playing chess how is it possible
for someone who's leading a meaningful
life to enjoy practicing the violin for
hours and hours cuz I know at an
ex-girlfriend I rarely mentioned here
and she complained to me about you know
getting getting playing violin
accurately every week you had to do a
certain number of hours of drills to
really play a violin at a high level you
need to maintain this accuracy with your
your hand motions how can you possibly
enjoy doing that don't you have
something better to do and I don't even
need to appeal here anything external I
don't have to appeal the idea of making
the world a better place of any kind of
ethical charitable mission any kind of
political ambition no I can just keep it
all in one bucket I can keep it all in
one category you why don't you have
something better to do in terms of who
you want to be into who and what it is
you're fashioning yourself into right
stuff is easy to understand but it's
it's very very hard to live with okay
have you ever been to a church you ever
been to a sincere question I've known a
lot of people on the internet who say
that they're Buddhists or even that
they're devout like scholars and experts
but they've never once been to a
Buddhist temple
there's 21st century I think there are
people who talk about Christianity the
internet don't really have experience
being in Christian temple you know what
the most pathetic thing of all is the
people who are made happy by the song
and dance the song and dance itself
isn't that pathetic someone plays the
organ someone prays someone says the
benediction right but there were people
who are really smiling there are people
who really experience joy there are
simple minded people who are taken
advantage of by religion and if you go
if you really start spending time at
church if you if you put on a costume as
I said before if you disguise yourself
as a true believer on stand there if
you're a person of real intelligence of
real brilliance of real intellect of
real self discipline if you're a person
who feels your own potential to be
something more meaningful in the world
with those few hours a day you spend in
church you will witness the tragedy of
the people who are too stupid who are
too dumb to know any better who are
really sincerely elated but having
someone in a robe tell them some vague
about how their a wonderful
person
how they're gonna go to heaven after
they die biggest nonsense imaginable
people who are smiling and clapping and
full of joy over the performance of
these rituals right a lot of us as
atheists we may feel a strong motivation
to go to church or if you're Muslim go
to attend a Muslim ceremony to make your
parents happy to make your grandparents
happy to make your aunts and uncle have
to make some friend or relative of yours
happy right but when you're there you
feel this same tragedy more acutely and
more deeply right because you can't
enjoy that ceremony you can't enjoy the
ritual you can't enjoy the illusions and
delusions of religion the way stupid
people can you can't turn your mind off
and join in the fun and on the contrary
what you see and feel is the tragedy of
people who are trapped in the opposite
mindset who can't escape from their own
stupid you can't escape from their own
lack of self-discipline who can't think
their way out of this trap people who
are so pathetic as to find this happy
and on a tiny scale each and every one
of us now carries a church in our
pockets and we sit down to pray every
time we waste a hour on our cell
phones you can ride the subway and see
people they are playing match three
tiles puzzle games line up the blinking
gemstones wiling away their hours and
among them the most pathetic the most
pitiable of all are those who are truly
happy when you examine
your own happiness when you examine what
it is that makes you happy and why
whether it's playing chess or snorting
cocaine you are gonna come to some very
dark conclusions about who you really
are and then either you're gonna get
motivated to change that and think
seriously about who and what it is you
want to be or you're going to retreat
into making excuses in the name of this
thing you call happiness